Raft replication simplification RFC (#3542)
redpanda-data/redpanda: docs/rfcs/20220119_raft_replication_simplification.md

- Issue: #1829 (Quality initiative)

## Current solution

Redpanda's raft protocol implementation supports currently two replication 
modes (consistency levels). Quorum replication mode works as in 'original' 
version of raft protocol i.e. replication call finishes when requested entry 
is safely replicated to the majority of replicas and flushed. In the leader 
ack mode (Kafka's ACKS=1) `replicate` call finishes as soon as the write 
to leader disk is finished (before it is flushed). Entries visibility for 
readers is also influenced by the replicate consistency levels. For entries 
replicate with Quorum consistency level redpanda makes them visible as soon as 
they are fsynced on majority of nodes. On the other hand entries with 
`leader_ack` consistency level are made visible as soon as they 
are written to followers disk but they are not required to be fsynced.

In current implementation the two described previously consistency levels 
use totally different approaches and code paths. Quorum level replication 
requests goes through the batching on the leader `raft::replicate_batcher`
and then they are dispatched to the followers via `raft::replicate_entries_stm`. 

> Raft `replicate_stm` writes data to leader disk and then dispatches 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Raft `replicate_stm` writes data to the leader disk and then dispatches 
```

> `append_entries_requests` to the follower in parallel with leader disk flush.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`append_entries_requests` to the follower in parallel with the leader disk flush.
```

> In this case raft implementation may have multiple requests in flight per follower. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, Raft implementation may have multiple requests in flight for each follower. 
```

> (currently number of requests pending is limited by per follower semaphore). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(currently the number of requests pending is limited by per follower semaphore). 
```

> Leader ack consistency replication is implemented differently 
> control is returned to the caller immediately after data are written 
> to the underlying `storage::log`. On the next heartbeat follower 
> is recognized to be behind the leader and is being recovered by `raft::recovery_stm`. 
> The `recovery_stm` reads a chunk of data and sends it to the follower 
> in a loop (single request at a time).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Leader ack consistency replication is implemented differently. 
Control is returned to the caller immediately after the data is written 
to the underlying `storage::log`. On the next heartbeat, the follower 
is recognized to be behind the leader and is recovered by `raft::recovery_stm`. 
The `recovery_stm` reads a chunk of data and sends it to the follower 
in a loop (a single request at a time).
```

## Purpose of the simplification

> There are multiple reasons that makes the simplification necessary and demanded, 
> the most important are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are multiple reasons that this simplification is necessary. The most important are:  
```

- code simplification
- unification of approaches

> - better handling of requests with mixed consistency level (current they cause latency spikes)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- better handling of requests with mixed consistency levels (currently they cause latency spikes)
```

> Also some future features that will benefit from simplification are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, some features will benefit from the simplification: 
```

> - in memory acks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- in-memory acks
```

> - leader being remote to data 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- leaders that are remote to data 
```

## Proposed solution

Proposed solution assumes that both currently supported consistency levels will 
be handled in the same way with use of `replicate_batcher` and `replicate_entries` stm. 
This approach has several advantages over the one currently 
used for `leader_ack` consistency level. 

> Current implementation of `quorum_acks` replication is robust and pretty 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current implementation of `quorum_acks` replication is robust and pretty 
```

well tested. No large code changes are required to use the 
`replicate_batcher` and `replicate_stm` to handle `leader_acks` replication. 
The way that the `replicate_stm` handles `append_entries` requests dispatching 
and leader log writes will allow to make them parallel in future. 

Additionally using `replicate_stm` prevents us from creating the 
append entries request twice since batches coming from `replicate_batcher` 
are not first handed of to disk and then read again but rather shared to 

> generate leader disk write and follower `append_entries` requests. 
> This approach significantly reduce the `storage::batch_cache` pressure and may 
> also reduce the disk usage (in some cluster with limited memory cache hit 
> ratio is not always 1.0 even if there are no reads other than reads issued by 
> `replicate_stm`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
generate a leader disk write and follower `append_entries` requests. 
This approach significantly reduces the `storage::batch_cache` pressure and may 
also reduce the disk usage (in some clusters with limited memory cache, the hit 
ratio is not always 1.0 even if there are no reads other than the reads issued by 
`replicate_stm`).
```

### Backpressure

> In current `quorum_ack` replication implementation the backpressure is 
> propagated from the followers to the `raft::replicate` caller 
> (Kafka Produce request handler effectively). Currently the backpressure 
> propagation is based on the per follower semaphore since RPC layer 
> lacks backpressure propagation mechanism. 
> When `replicate_entries` stm is unable to acquire follower dispatch units 
> it will wait holding `replicate_batcher` memory reservation lock so that 
> it can not accept writes indefinitely. When `replicate_batcher` memory 
> reservation semaphore is exhausted it prevents first stage of `replicate_stages` 
> from finishing not allowing for more requests to be processed. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the current `quorum_ack` replication implementation, the backpressure is 
propagated from the followers to the `raft::replicate` caller 
(the Kafka Produce request handler effectively). Currently, the backpressure 
propagation is based on the per-follower semaphore since the RPC layer 
lacks a backpressure propagation mechanism. 
When `replicate_entries` stm is unable to acquire follower dispatch units, 
it will wait, holding the `replicate_batcher` memory reservation lock so that 
it can not accept writes indefinitely. When the `replicate_batcher` memory 
reservation semaphore is exhausted, it prevents the first stage of `replicate_stages` 
from finishing, not allowing more requests to be processed. 
```

Current `leader_ack` mechanism lacks backpressure propagation. 
Leader can be arbitrary large number of entries ahead of followers. 
This solution may be a problem since user has an impression that data are 
replicated while the data are actually stored only on the leader. 

> In the proposed solution we are going to handle back pressure in the same way 
> for both consistency level. This way there will be a guarantee that followers 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the proposed solution, we are going to handle backpressure in the same way 
for both consistency levels. This way there will be a guarantee that followers 
```

can always keep up with the leader.

> ### Memory usage

Reviewer 2: I'm interested in the case where:
- initially we have 3 insync replicas
- an acks=1 write passes through replicate_batcher and into replicate_entries_stm
- one of the followers stops responding or returns an error

Do we keep the batches in memory to do some retries (perhaps until the follower is "officially" out of sync due to heartbeat timeout), or do we immediately drop the request to that peer, declare them out of sync and kick them into recovery mode?

Intuitively I'd kind of rather let the peer stay in the "happy path" until we really decide they're out of sync based on a heartbeat timeout, so that something like a TCP disconnect doesn't knock a node into recovery mode, but that could block up the whole write pipeline if we have a finite memory allowance and we're holding on to batches for the unresponsive-but-not-yet-timed-out follower.

Not sure what the right answer is, just something that jumped out to me as an interesting scenario.

Memory usage control will be achieved in the same way as it is done right now 
i.e. we will not finish first stage of replication when `replicate_batcher` 
memory semaphore is exhausted. This way we will prevent Kafka layer from 
buffering indefinite number of batches in pending replicate requests. Replicate 
batcher memory units are released after the request is handed of to the 
socket so that all the user space buffer can be freed. 
In future we may consider per shard semaphore controlling the total amount 
of memory used by all replicate batchers.

### Recovery STM coordination - finishing recovery

`recovery_stm` is started every time the leader identifies the follower as 
being behind. Since recovery stm is currently used for both recovering the 

> follower (when it is actually behind) and delivering follower data replicated 
> with `leader_ack` consistency the `recovery_stm` implementation contains some 
> optimization to minimize the `leader_ack` latency. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
follower (when it is actually behind) and delivering follower data replicated 
with the `leader_ack` consistency, the `recovery_stm` implementation contains some 
optimization to minimize the `leader_ack` latency. 
```

There are two main optimizations:

> - not stopping recovery when last replicate request consistency level is `leader_ack`
> - triggering next dispatch loop immediately after leader disk append

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- not stopping the recovery when the last replicate request consistency level is `leader_ack`
- triggering the next dispatch loop immediately after the leader disk append
```

> Those optimizations make handling of recovering follower more complex in 
> other scenarios f.e. `leadership_transfer`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These optimizations make the handling of the recovering follower more complex in 
other scenarios, such as `leadership_transfer`. 
```

> Since there is no coordination between the two paths that the follower append 
> entries requests are sent from (i.e. `replicate_stm` and `recovery_stm`) those 
> request may be reordered and cause log truncations and redeliveries which lead 
> to increased latency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since there is no coordination between the two paths that the follower append 
entry requests are sent from (i.e. `replicate_stm` and `recovery_stm`), those 
requests may be reordered and cause log truncations and redeliveries, which lead 
to increased latency.
```

> In the proposed solution since we are not longer going to relay on the 
> recovery STM to deliver messages to follower in normal conditions the complicated
> handling of recovery finishing logic will no longer be needed. 
> When follower is up to date with the leader `recovery_stm` is simply not running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the proposed solution, since we are not longer going to rely on the 
recovery STM to deliver messages to the follower in normal conditions, the complicated
handling of recovery finishing logic will no longer be needed. 
When the follower is up to date with the leader, `recovery_stm` is simply not running.
```

> The only place that will require coordination is the time when follower 
> is not longer behind the leader but `replicate_stm` skips dispatching requests 
> to the follower as it is still recovering. This may lead to the situation in 
> which next leader append will happen before `recovery_stm` received follower 
> response for last request i.e. it can not finish recovery as log end already 
> advanced. This case may be handled by coordinating dispatching follower 
> requests from `recovery_stm` and `replicate_stm`. 
> We may introduce last sent offset to 
> `raft::follower_index_metadata` to check if recovery should finish 
> instead of the check being based only on the follower response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only situation that will require coordination is when the follower 
is no longer behind the leader, but `replicate_stm` skips dispatching requests 
to the follower as it is still recovering. This may lead to a situation in 
which the next leader append will happen before the `recovery_stm` received the follower 
response for the last request, i.e. it cannot finish recovery because the log end already 
advanced. This case may be handled by coordinating dispatching follower 
requests from `recovery_stm` and `replicate_stm`. 
We can introduce the last sent offset to 
`raft::follower_index_metadata` to check whether recovery should finish 
instead of the check being based only on the follower response.
```

> This way the `replicate_stm` will not skip sending a request to the follower if 
> that is the next request follower is supposed to receive, on the other hand the 
> `recovery_stm` will not try to send the same request again but will finish 
> assuming response will be successful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This way, the `replicate_stm` will not skip sending a request to the follower if 
it is the next request the follower is supposed to receive. On the other hand, the 
`recovery_stm` will not try to send the same request again, but will finish, 
assuming the response will be successful.
```

### Implementation details

> To implement simplified solution we will pass the `consistency_level` 
> parameter to `raft::replicate_batcher::replicate` method. 
> The `raft::replicate_entries_stm::apply_on_leader` method will return immediately after 
> successful `leader_append`. Full quorum replication round will be finish 
> after `raft::replicate_entries_stm::wait_for_majority()` returns. 
> Replicate batcher based on cached request `consistency_level` will decide when 
> to release the request, either after `apply_on_leader` finishes or 
> `wait_for_majority` finishes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To implement the simplified solution, we will pass the `consistency_level` 
parameter to the `raft::replicate_batcher::replicate` method. 
The `raft::replicate_entries_stm::apply_on_leader` method will return immediately after 
the successful `leader_append`. The full quorum replication round will be finished 
after the `raft::replicate_entries_stm::wait_for_majority()` returns. 
The replicate batcher, based on the cached request `consistency_level`, will decide when 
to release the request, either after `apply_on_leader` finishes or 
`wait_for_majority` finishes.
```

> The same way as in current implementation the `raft::replicate_entries_stm` will
> release batcher memory units after dispatching follower request. 
> This will allow propagating backpressure for both consistency levels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As in current implementation, the `raft::replicate_entries_stm` will
release batcher memory units after dispatching the follower request. 
This will allow propagating backpressure for both consistency levels.
```
